1. phylo genetic seminars archival online -- google 
2. Paul Lewis -- the teacher man of phylogenetics, phyloseminar.org
	A. did a 4 part series on the primer of phylogenetics
Review from previous weeks:
	1. markov chain - the chain of events that we care about 
	2. markov property - the memorylessness of a markov chain 
	3. discrete or continuous time 
		A. discrete - a set time point
			i. a discrete time point becomes continuous when the time points become infinitely small
		B. continuous - a continum of time
	4. state space
		A. all possible states that can exist, we focus on discrete states in this class 
			i. There is a 2x2 matrix of time and state, discrete and continuous. 
		B.nucleotides are the general state space for phylogenetic models
			i. can also use codons, amino acids
	5. stationary distribution 
		A. we have a define set of probabilites in which we will see states, if the chain has reached its stationary dostribution the states will be
		seen at the same prob. through time
		B. phylogenetics generally assumes that stationality was reached before hand
	6. Reversible 
		A. the probability found when moving forward is the same when moving backwards

Poisson Process
	1. # of events that occur in an interval of length t is a Pois(lambda*t) random variable
	2. # of events that occur in disjoint interval are independent
	3. the waiting times between events are t ~ Exp(lambda)

Jukes Cantor
	1. uses the rate matrix not called the transition matrix here
	2. has the rate variable on the diagonals and the relative probabilities of transition
		A. the relative here means that the probabilites have to be divided by their sum. The division by the sum is normalizing. 

General Time Reversible Models
	1. Tavare, 1986 
	* there is more commonality for A -> G and C -> T because they are the same types and it is biochemically easier to change this way 
	2. the pi(A, G, T, C) are frequencies, so they must add to one. There are 3 free values because the 4th must be able to add to 1
		A. If you just add the #s of AGCTs it is an estimate of the frequency calculated values, it becomes a problem when there is dependency through relationships
	3. the R values are the tendancy of a specific base to change into another
		A. the R values have to average to one, so again free values = n-1
	4. the rate values are then the commonality of a base by its tendancy 
	5. This model has 8 parameters to try and estimate

Reversibility 
	1. pi_i * q_ij = pi_j * q_ji for i<> j 
		
Branch Length Scaling
	1. Branch lengths typically denote expected # of substitutions. For this to be true the weighted mean across all states must be 1.
		A. normalize them, divide by the total -- usually used to give a property to the data set 

Probability of a character history 
	Jukes Cantor 
	1. Given a character history -- the waiting times between events given and assume they are independent 
		A. using the exponential function to look up the probabilities associated 
		B. the joint probability of the independent events is just the product of their probabilities 
		C. Need to know the probabilities within the event, jukes cantor all probabilities are the same 
	2. So, the prob(character history) = prod(exp(waiting times) * (character state change^n))
	
	If we begin the chain with an A and end on a G
	3. we usually dont know any of the intermediate states or waiting times and generally not really total time
		A. unknown character history and there are many many ways to get the answer
	4. P(t) = e^(Qt)
		A. being done to account for every single possible path to calculate how to get from A to G
		B. given enough time passing, then we cant tell where we started but the probabilities go to the stationary probabilities 
